3/10/2010 v0.2

MM3 version changed to reflect MM4 changes.

Overview of MamMark 4 Communications Sub-system


1. MamMark 4 Hardware.

The MamMark 4 is a small embedded computer system intended to be used to
monitor marine and terrestrial animals.  Its hardware includes:

. TI MSP430F2618 MCU.

. external 16 bit ADC converter connected to SPI1 (UsciB1, dedicated)
. various external sensors connected to 16 bit ADC

. Dock serial (cradle), Uart1, UsciA1, dedicated.

. GPS serial, UART0, UsciA0, external mux

. CC2420 Radio, not present

. Mass Storage on external Secure Digital card, SPI1, UsciB0,
  dedicated.  Must be SPI1/UsciB0 



2. Mass Storage

Mass Storage is implemented using Secure Digital cards (full size,
micro-sd).  Currently the driver only supports the 1st generation of
the SD protocol which limits the size to 2 gigabytes.

A custom SD driver implements the interface to the SD card.  The card
sits on a dedicated SPI/USCI bus and is shared between users.  A power
and configuration module controls turning the card on and off and
configuration of i/o pins.  Data going to and from the card is in
blocks of 514 bytes.  This is a sector size of 512 bytes and 2 bytes
of CRC.

SD cards provide no provisions to signal to a s/w driver that
attention is needed (no h/w events, interrupts, etc).  The driver
implements polling using tinyos timers when doing reset operations and
other operations when reading and writing.

The driver is fully event driven and the interface to it is split
phase.  An operation is started up and when completed by the driver a
coresponding completion signal is generated.  See SDsp.nc for details
of the interface.

The storage system uses a fixed number of buffers to feed the data stream going
to the SD card.  If these buffers get exhausted a failure is signaled.


3. Communications Structure

Communications is needed via the serial port (cradle, docked), via the Radio (when
surfaced and the in a resonable location for the communications to occur), and when
talking to the GPS module.

The serial port is multiplexed between the GPS and the cradle.  Further when the
radio is active it needs to own the SPI1/USART1 resource as well.  The SD also
uses SPI1/USART1.

When the device is submerged, no communications is needed, NONE owns the resource.
When docked, communications makes use of the direct connect serial mechanism (SERIAL).
When the tag is in a defined GPS location, the radio will be enabled and used for
communications (RADIO).

When a subsytem owns the hardware it will be looking to collect packets for receive
and sending packets for transmit.  While owned it should be prepared to release
the resource if another subsystem requests.  However this should only happen when
the subsystem is in an idle state.  Ie. at a packet boundary so that some level
of forward progress can be made.  Currently there are no provisions in the serial
stack nor the radio stack for packet boundary detection/release.


Issues:

- The ResourceRequested interface will only connect to the actual owner of the
  resource.  If multiple requesters occur at the same time and prior to one
  of them being granted, the fact that other requesters are present isn't seen
  by the eventual owner of the resource.

- We want some kind of default owner implementation to handle the condition
  when no communications is occuring.  This will allow turning off using
  DCO sourcing SMCLK which in turn allows setting the CPU into a lower power
  mode when sleeping.

- we need a mechanism to periodically resync the DCO (which supplies the clock
  to the subsystem clock for the UART hardward, baud rate) to ACLK.  Currently
  this only occurs once on boot.

- We tried an experimental implementation giving ownership to SERIAL (immediate
  request).  When another subsystem (SD, GPS, etc) requests ResourceRequested.requested
  will be signalled.  SERIAL (the current owner) will receive this event and do
  a Release followed by another Request.

  The intent is to release thus allowing the requesting subsystem to get in and use
  the resource with SERIAL being queued up for later access.

  However this doesn't work.  The default Arbiter implementation signals requested when
  the new subsystem call request.  However, the new subsystem request hasn't been queued
  when the requested event is signaled.  The Release/Request then causes the same owner
  to own the resource.


What I need:

1) Mechanism that allows a dynamic ownership of the resource (USART1) with signalling
   that indicates new requesters so an owner can release and possibly rerequest appropriately.

2) Serial and Radio stack modifications that allow detection of packet boundaries (idle)
   so appropriate release points (if others are requesting) can be defined.



The mm3 platform source tree can be gotten via:

mkdir mm_t2
cd mm_t2
svn co svn://<repo_site>/mammark_tinyos2/t2_mm3

this will create mm_t2/t2_mm3.

I also have some changes to the t2.1 tree.  Assuming that mm_t2/t2_cur/tinyos-2.x holds
the current cvs tip of the t2.1 tree apply patches...

cd mm_t2
mkdir t2_cur
cd t2_cur
cvs -z3 -d:pserver:anonymous@tinyos.cvs.sourceforge.net:/cvsroot/tinyos co -P tinyos-2.x

for i in ../../t2_mm3/Added_Bits/*.patch; do \
    patch -p0 < $i ; done
